If a president defied the Supreme Court,
what would you do?
>> Well,
the as you say, the court lacks the
power of the purse. We lack the power of
the sword. And so, we interpret the
Constitution. We draw in precedents. We
have these questions of of structure.
And, you know, we make the most with the
tools that we have.
The Supreme Court faces a roster of
cases this term that could reshape
presidential power in America and change
the course of Donald Trump's presidency.
>> The court hears arguments over Trump's
sweeping worldwide tariffs and whether
he can usurp Congress's power to set
tariff levels.
>> A big fraction of the Supreme Court's
docket will present the question, can
President Trump do fill in the blank?
President Trump has a remarkable winning
streak at the US Supreme Court, but will
it last?
>> And my guest this week is likely to be
the decisive vote in at least some of
those cases. Supreme Court Justice Amy
Coney Barrett. In her time on the court,
Barrett has helped deliver a number of
big victories for the conservative legal
movement. But she's also broken with her
conservative colleagues on issues
related to Trump's own power. Her new
book, Listening to the Law, offers
insights into her approach to the
Constitution. From the Dobs decision on
abortion to her view of the Supreme
Court's role in the age of Donald Trump.
Justice Barrett, welcome to Interesting
Times.
>> Thank you for having me, Ross.
>> I I honestly would never have said no. I
have to be honest. Um, so your book is
mostly about and we're mostly going to
talk about theories of juristprudence,
the place of the Supreme Court in
American life, um, possibly some issues
related to the Trump presidency and
executive power. But it does start with
a little window into the personal world
of Amy Coney Barrett. So, I'm going to
start with a couple of questions about
that terrain. We looked it up and you
are the first guest. we've had on the
show who has more children than I do,
which is which is only because we
haven't yet succeeded in booking Elon
Musk, I should I should say. Um
>> there's still time for you to catch up
with me, Ross.
>> Is I that's that's a bold statement and
um I appreciate your confidence in my
youthful energy and vigor. Um, so when
when you were being nominated, uh, this
newspaper, the New York Times, ran a
story that talked about your mix of sort
of personal and professional obligations
and how it made you a certain kind of
trailblazer. And the the story described
you and you know you can accept this
description or not but a woman who is
both unabashedly ambitious and deeply
religious who has excelled at the
heights of a demanding profession even
as she speaks openly about prioritizing
her faith and family. So I'm curious if
you actually see yourself this way at
all. Do you see yourself as a particular
kind of trailblazer or role model in
that kind of balancing act?
I don't see myself as a trailblazer, nor
do I love the word ambitious because I
feel like the word ambition
um puts a focus on, you know, success or
ambition for its own sake, which isn't
how I've ever conceived of my career
when I was growing up. So, I was born in
1972 and my mom stayed home and the
parents of most of my friends uh had a
working dad and a stay-at-home mom. My
kids have had a mix and for them it's
kind of become unexceptional to have a
mom that worked. Whereas it felt kind of
like a big thing for me to make the
choice because my own mother had had I'm
one of seven. She had a large family
which is I say in the book that's what I
always wanted. That was my number one
priority and I wasn't sure that I could
do that and work at the same time but I
always have since I had our first child.
So, um I think my life looks different
than the life of my mom and my aunts and
you know my friends parents at the time
but it's one that my own daughters and
and sons and and their friends I hope
can just treat as unexceptional like you
can stay home if you want you can work
if you want you can do both.
>> Do you think of yourself as a feminist
a conservative feminist if that is a
category that you would accept? No,
labels are so dangerous because they
mean different things to different
people. I mean, if if being a feminist
simply means having the view that women
can do whatever it is they put their
minds to and have opportunities open to
them, then yes, I am. Um, but I think
any stripe of feminism that you describe
is going to have, you know, labels are
are risky. So, I'll just say yes. Yes,
labels are risky. labels are risky
especially when you are charged with the
interpretation of the entire the entire
US constitution. Um how do you actually
do it and I I say this as someone I I
obviously work here I am working um my
wife is a journalist and writer and we
you know do a lot of I think the same
kind of balancing that you and your
husband have done and it takes some sort
of strange forms but it's very
challenging. I will say to have, you
know, any number of kids is challenging,
but to have a large family and have a
busy professional life. And I'm just
curious as a Supreme Court justice, how
you actually feel like you guys make it
work.
>> A lot of people ask, that's probably the
question that I get asked most often.
Um, it is challenging. remember I don't
have seven three-year-olds
and you know now my oldest is 24 so we
have we have five children living at
home although one of those is in nursing
school so I really kind of think of us
as having four at home now but they're
in middle school and high school now it
looks differently and it has looked
differently at each phase of parenting
um you know and you grow a family slowly
so you know at various points we had one
two three children
I think our attitude was always at Each
stage it looked different at each stage.
Our priority was always the kids and we
were always I one of us it didn't
necessarily have to be me stood ready to
walk away and stay home with the kids if
that's what we decided that they needed.
>> But you know for most of our family life
I was a law professor and we lived in
Southbend which was a small easily
navigable city.
>> A very there's a lot of very
familyfriendly neighborhoods around
Notre Dame.
>> Very familyfriendly. Yeah. And my my
schedule was flexible. I could work late
at night. I mean, writers get some of
that benefit, too. I could be home with
them um you know, after school and then
I could stay up late at night or or
write on the weekends. Um so, I had a
lot of flexibility early on.
>> Do you think of yourself as a kind of
relaxed freerange kind of parent or
Well, I I ask because one thing that
struck me having a bunch of kids is just
that like the life that I guess in
different ways we're both in sort of the
life of the professional class or
something. It just really seems set up
for, you know, you have two kids and
you're going to be helping them with
homework and you're going to be going to
parents night and you, you know, you
have a sort of set of parental
obligations. And a lot of people I know
who do well with large families have
sort of opted out of that kind of
intensity, which isn't really how I
would think a Supreme Court justice
would approach things. But like, do your
kids think of you as intense?
>> I would say that my kids think of me as
intense.
>> That's not surprising. Yeah, I think
they would laugh if they if someone
asked them whether I was kind of a a
loose freerange parent or my husband
Jesse for that matter. No, we're we're
pretty organized and pretty intense. And
in my experience, it's pretty tough to
run a large family unless you have a lot
of organization. At at the point at
which we added our son, John Peter, who
at that point was number five. John
Peter is adopted. He was three when he
came home from Haiti. We kind of we
shifted. We had recently done a re or
were just about to do a renovation and
our pantry we started doing so much
Costco and Sam shipping that one of our
daughter's friends came over walked in
our pantry and said this is like a
grocery store.
>> So no it takes a lot of organization but
I will say on the the pressure to to be
at everything. We do a lot of trading
off. We're not both at every um sporting
event. We trade off. And so for, you
know, my my son's soccer games, maybe
just one of us is there and we we aren't
at a point where we can have the luxury
of both attending everything,
>> right? But even just one of Yeah. I
mean, my parents very rarely attended my
JV soccer games.
>> Mine either.
>> Um, all right. Last last question on
this theme. And I think, you know,
you've talked about resisting the idea
of being particularly ambitious or seen
as particularly ambitious, resisting
labels. You succeeded Ruth Bader
Ginsburg, um, who attained even among
Supreme Court justices a kind of
distinctive kind of celebrity, even a
distinctive kind of brand, right? You
know, you had notorious RBG
um shirts and hats and so on. Like how
comfortable are you with the idea of
either yourself or any Supreme Court
justice filling that kind of cultural
icon role? You know, people were
fascinated by Ginsburg's workout
routines. I'm not going to ask about
your workout routine, right? But like is
that
>> is that appropriate to the office? Is it
a challenge for the office? Is it
something that justice should sort of
want to withdraw from a little bit? How
do you feel about that kind of the image
of Amy Coney Barrett and culture?
>> So I haven't thought a lot about the
image. I mean so and I'll just talk
about this with respect to myself and
and my own view or what what I hope to
contribute to young lawyers, young
women, professionals, what have you,
when they look at my career. I don't
strive to be an icon or a cultural icon.
I'm a lawyer. I'm a judge. And that's
how I think of myself and that's how I
approach the job. And and personally I
mean I think that those who are judges
do a lot of work by themselves because
you spend a lot of time reading briefs
and writing much like writers. So it is
a pretty solitary
>> with slightly more power and influence
at the end of a judgment line at the end
of what we write. Um, no, I don't strive
that that isn't really my personality
and isn't what I strive for and at all.
Um, I don't mind that people can see
what it's like to have a large family
and still work or still have a career
that, um, a career like mine where
you're working at, um, at a high level
of government because I think that's
valuable. Uh, I think it's valuable for
people to see that, but that's not to
say that I want to be an icon of any
sort. I I feel the same way just when my
kids have their friends come over to our
house. I I think we have a great life
and I think a lot of people um maybe
don't always have the chance to see how
great it is to to have a large family.
Challenging, but also
>> slightly challenging.
>> Slightly challenging, but also fun.
>> Yeah. No, certainly fun. Like, you know,
an intense military campaign can be fun.
All right, let's talk about the law. Um,
and I I feel like I just want to start
sort of big picture and theoretical. You
were a clerk for Justice Antinine
Scalia,
>> um, who is sort of seen as
>> one of the key intellectual progenitors
of the school of constitutional
interpretation that gets called
originalism. You are an originalist. You
write in the book about the theory and
practice of originalism. What is
originalism?
>> So originalism simply stated is just the
proposition that the constitution should
be interpreted consistently with the
meaning that the words of the
constitution had at the time that it was
ratified. So where the meaning of those
words can be discerned, it is decisive.
>> Oh well that's easy.
>> That's okay. That's it.
>> We can go home.
>> I think Yeah. I mean, I think one of the
great advantages that originalism has
had over rival schools of
interpretation, especially in the years
since Scalia joined the court and sort
of his influence began to sort of extend
through the conservative legal movement,
but obviously I think beyond that as
well, right? I think even most prominent
liberal justices have to claim some kind
of respect for originalism. There are
liberal interpretations of originalism.
It's been a tremendously successful
theory in part for the reason we just
sort of jokingly exchanged that it's
incredibly easy to state and it sounds
like basic common sense. What else would
a justice do if not interpret what the
words meant when when they were
ratified? But it is a little bit more
complicated than that in actual
practice. Right? So first of all,
>> you talk about the meaning of the words.
So you're not trying to interpret the
intentions of the people who
>> rat wrote the constitution or wrote the
statutory law. Right.
>> Right. Right. So we're trying to
interpret the meaning of words like
freedom of speech, establishment of
religion, unreasonable search and
seizure. We're looking at the words and
we're saying, well, what would someone
in 1791, which is when the Bill of
Rights was ratified, have understood
those words, those phrases, those
expressions to mean as opposed to
thinking your way into the mind of James
Madison and saying, would James Madison
have thought that this was an
unreasonable search or seizure?
>> And so, does that make you a historian
by necessity?
>> No, it does not make me a historian.
Critics might say, well, judges are
originalist judges are amateur
historians. you know, they're they're
not historians, but they're trying to
play them on TV. But a historian is
trying to do something entirely
different. A historian is offering a
historical narrative, historical
account, is doing a much more
wide-ranging search through many more
sources. I mean, the questions that we
as judges pursue are fundamentally legal
ones. Is this speech protected? Um, you
know, the term has begun. We've heard
arguments already and you know history
is relevant to some of those and our
constitutional document is you know more
than two centuries old and so we have
accumulated all kinds of history not
just the original meaning but also all
of the precedent that has um that of
court decisions that have been decided
in the interim since the the
constitution was ratified. So we're not
historians. We're looking at the legal
history um behind certain words and
phrases. And that's something actually
that all judges do, not just
originalists, because as a putting on my
constitutional law professor hat, there
are various sources that all
constitutional interpreters look to. And
the question is just how do you weight
them? History is a tool in everyone's
toolkit.
We'll get to the question of precedent
and um how it influences decision-making
in a minute, but I want to I want to
stay with this question of of history.
So, just take a phrase like unreasonable
search and seizure,
>> right? So, what does it mean for an
originalist to
consider what a phrase like that meant
at the time of the ratification of the
constitution?
>> Yes. So you would look back, one of the
famous cases, it's an example I use in
the book is Kylo versus United States,
which presented the question of whether
infrared technology to detect heat in a
building for purposes of detecting
whether someone was growing marijuana
illegally, whether that was a search.
You didn't enter the premises, you know,
you didn't actually see anything. You
just used this heat sensor to to try to
detect the drug activity. And the
question was whether that was a search.
And so the court, Justice Glee wrote the
opinion. It was for a majority of the
court. Um looked to see well what did it
mean to search? And that required
looking at founding era dictionaries.
Well, what did a search mean? Um it
looked at he looked at founding era
legal treatises, Blackstone's
commentaries, looked at some cases from
that period and ultimately concluded
that yes, that was a search. Clearly,
they didn't have that kind of infrared
technology or this like thermal imaging
device, I think it was at the time of
the founding. Um, but something that
enhanced
um the senses so that you could see
things or sense things that would not be
discernible to the ordinary eye was that
kind of invasion or line crossing. And
I'm paraphrasing all of this to make it
more accessible that one might consider
a search of someone's home.
>> But reasonable people then will disagree
about that some of that kind of
historical interpretation. Right. of
course because for for a number of
reasons. Um often people may agree about
the principle like yes this is what
search means but then disagree about its
application to particular facts and we
have that kind of disagreement all the
time in the law even when you're not
talking about um a situation in which
history is relevant. So law is hard and
the cases that make it to the Supreme
Court are typically unsettled which is
why they make their way up to us. People
sometimes caricature
law generally originalists in particular
I think it's a common misconception but
that answers are easy and that if you
can just find the right theory there's
the promise of certitude and no legal
theory can deliver that and that
includes originalism.
>> So let's talk about then a case where
there isn't a specific provision of the
constitution that everyone is trying to
argue over what it means and how it
applies. um which would be the case of
abortion,
>> right? Where obviously one of the most
controversial decisions that you've been
involved in so far at the court is the
DOS decision that overruled Roie Wade.
Um the Constitution obviously doesn't
say anything about abortion. There's no
abortion provision in the Bill of Rights
or anywhere else. Right.
>> Right. Um, so does that just mean from
an originalist perspective, case closed,
you know, abortion is left to Congress
or left to the states and that's all
that needs to be said?
>> No, because the DOS decision applied a
framework. It actually isn't an
originalist decision because it's
building on precedent. So the DOS
decision was interpreting the 14th
amendment's due process clause which
says that no person shall be deprived of
life, liberty, or property without due
process of law. Because to the extent
one might argue that there is a right to
an abortion in the constitution, it's
located in that clause. That's where row
um found it that no um no person shall
be deprived of liberty would be the
relevant one there. And so the courts,
the line of cases is known as
substantive due process. And what those
cases say is, yes, this this phrase, no
person shall be deprived of life,
liberty, or property without due process
of law. It sounds like, well, Ross, if
I'm going to take away your car, I have
to give you fair procedures before doing
so. But the court has long recognized
that it also has a substantive component
that inheres in that word liberty. And
so there are some things that the
legislature can't take away. Be a
Congress, you know, where the 14th
amendment applies specifically to the
states
>> that liberties, to be clear, that are
not themselves enumerated
>> that are not themselves enumerated.
Well, well, to be tricky and I'll I'll
try to avoid going into complete law
professor mode, but um that word liberty
and the 14th amendment does incorporate
um many of the guarantees that are
specifically stated in the Bill of
Rights and make it so that states have
to um respect say freedom of religion,
you know, the freedom from unreasonable
searches and seizures and so on because
um were it not for the 14th amendment,
everything in the Bill of Rights would
constrain only the federal government.
Um, but yes, that word liberty does
protect some content above and beyond
things that are expressly stated in the
constitution. But you see the problem. I
might think a lot of things are in
liberty that you may not think are in
liberty that that one would disagree
with. And there's a lot of risk and this
has been a very contested area of
constitutional law for a long time.
there's a lot of risk in making judges
the final arbiters of exactly what the
content of that word liberty is. So in
an effort to um reconcile this idea that
the Supreme Court is neither a
constitution maker nor a democratically
representative body um in much less
branch of government. The test says,
well, if there are some things that are
so deeply entrenched and so
fundamentally a part of American society
that they go without saying, we don't
need to enumerate them, we don't need to
say them out loud. Then those are the
kinds of things where it's just widely
understood. So widely understood that we
don't have to put it in writing. We
don't have to commit it to paper, commit
it to parchment, so to speak. um then
those kinds of things inherent in that
word liberty and they have the status of
constitutional guarantee. But that's a
small step.
>> What would be some examples of those
kind of liberties apart from the
abortion question?
>> Um marriage, the right to direct the
upbringing of one's children. These are
all of ones I'm I'm pulling from
precedent. The right to use
contraception.
Um the court has said that the ones that
are not included are the right to
assisted suicide, the right to abortion.
Um I think those are probably the two
most prominent ones that have been held
not on the list,
>> right? And you were one of the people
who held that the right to abortion was
not on the list. Why?
>> Yes. because given the test. So the the
test as I said these are rights that are
so widely understood to be um
fundamental that they go without saying.
The test is that before the court will
recognize such a right as an
unenumerated constitutional guarantee.
It has to be stated at a specific level
because if you state something at a
broad enough like right to control um
one's body that could include a whole
lot of things um everything from
assisted suicide to abortion to
>> to drug drug use laws against
>> exly. Exactly. So you have to state it
at a um specific level of generality
because it's also only if something is
identified precisely that you can really
measure what the degree of buy in and
among the American public is. And then
it has to be deeply rooted in this
country's history and tradition. You
know it can't be a Johnny come lately.
Um the case I I talk about this in the
book Washington versus Gluxburg is the
name of the test. Um for purposes of
this test it's not an originalism thing.
It's not just frozen, you know, at the
moment of the ratification of the 14th
amendment. Um, this is actually looking,
you know, more deeply at the history and
traditions of the American people. And
abortion failed that test. The right to
an abortion failed that test because
it's been a deeply contested issue. It
certainly was in 1973 when Row was
decided and continued to be contested.
uh Casey versus Planned Parenthood
first. That's the case in which the
court first confronted the question of
whether to overturn Row uh versus Wade,
you know, prior to DOS. And Casey, the
controlling
opinion did not say that Ro was right,
but for reasons of star decisis, which I
assume we're going to want to talk about
precedent later, said better to just let
this lie because we're hoping that this
will just bring both sides of this
controversy together um in America and
let's just say like now it's settled.
It's a truce. Well, that didn't happen
post Casey. You know, the right to
abortion has continued to role our
politics. So what the court held in dos
was that it could not be said that the
right to terminate a pregnancy was one
that was deeply rooted and was
considered so fundamental by a
supermaajority of Americans that it
didn't even need to be said. It went
without saying
>> but there using that test right history
beyond just legal history also becomes
relevant surely right like the condition
of debates about abortion in the 19th
century become relevant to that kind of
test right put it this way I think it is
very reasonable to look at the history
of the abortion debate over the last 50
years and say the court tried to settle
this case it clearly didn't there isn't
a deeply rooted
sort of pro-choice consensus in America.
It's more contested than that. I I think
that's true, but it's a historical
judgment. It's a judgment about public
opinion. It's a judgment about a whole
host of things that are outside the
letter of the law.
>> So, this this test, this whole area of
substantive due process is tricky for
some of the reasons you say. That's been
a criticism of the doctrine in general
and a criticism of the general notion
that we can have rights that the
constitution doesn't specify precisely
because of the kind of inquiry that it
invites judges to undertake. But Dobs
didn't Dobs didn't question that. Dobs
accepted that there is this doctrine of
substantive due process.
>> Do you question that?
>> Well, now Ross, you're asking questions
that I can't answer. No, I'm very
careful in the book and I'm always very
very careful. you know, I I apply kind
of confirmation hearing rules. So, I
take everything and and I do in the book
and my discussion of dos take the law as
I find it, you know, as it is. And it's
and I will say I mean, so I think you're
right that as a matter of theory, this
inquiry about is something deeply
settled um in this country's history and
tradition. I do think that that that
that
inquiry could sweep more broadly than
just the law, but as a practical matter
in the the cases and there are just kind
of a handful of these substantive due
process cases, the court has focused
primarily on the law and primarily on
the existence of abortion um
restrictions. For example, in DOS like
the the court could detail and could
look at because that's
>> right. You could say, right, there were
abortion restrictions in the 19th
century, in the 18th century, and so on.
Row was decided and when was decided,
yeah, still had prohibitions in place.
Well, at the risk of not getting
definite answers sort of confirmation
hearing style, I I am just interested in
pressing a little bit on both the limits
of originalism and also just the places
where
the sort of interpretation of the
meaning of the law interacts with
prudence. I guess you could say sort of
how justices think about their role in
American politics and sort of their
interaction
um with politics as it actually exists.
So on that question of sort of limits
and hard and and hard issues, right, the
best reason why an originalist who might
have some doubts about substantive due
process would just sort of go along with
the tests that you've just described
would be star decisis, right? the the
premise that uh the court has some kind
of obligation to respect precedent and
work from precedent and not just in
every decision go back to treat every
case as a denovo case and so on right
>> um but at the same time the court
overturns president
>> right
>> all the time
>> well not all the time
>> okay not all the time how often
>> so in the Roberts court I've I've the
statistics that I have seen and I had my
law clerks gather them um for me for
various purposes. The Roberts court has
overturned president roughly one time,
one time per year. Before that, the
Ranquist and Burger courts I think were
more at around two and a half or three.
So, the court takes precedent quite
seriously and the court really does not
overturn precedent like all the time as
as
>> right. Yeah. So how do you how do you
how do you tell how do you tell when
it's okay to overturn president?
>> So star decisis itself is a doctrine and
has its own legal test. So you know
we're talking about dos so that's that's
a good example. I've talked about the
doctrinal test of substantive due
process which is the way to measure
whether row was rightly decided. But the
question when you decide whether to
overturn precedent is never just is this
decision right or wrong because if
that's the only question well then you
don't need star decisis because you just
decide what you think is right every
time. Um the doctrine of star decisis is
the second stage of the analysis because
if a decision is wrong then you have to
decide whether you should keep it for
many of the reasons you say you know
stability
um reliance interests etc.
>> What are reliance interests? What does
that term mean? Reliance interests are
things that would be upset or undone if
a decision is undone. Typically the
classic case when the doctrine of star
decisis was first articulated in the law
it was usually um the classic examples
were property and contract. You know, if
you have a particular law that governs
the sale of homes, for example, and the
court overturns a precedent of real
estate or property law, all of a sudden
it could call into question title to
hundreds of of houses in a way that
would be hard to undo. And you can
imagine um many many things like that,
particularly in commercial interests is
those are the the classic law professor
cases where you point to reliance
interests. So can there be social
reliance interests in the sense of
people making life choices on the basis
of a right being protected?
>> Depends what you mean by social reliance
interests. So in um
>> well to take to make it concrete right
so in Oberfell versus Hodgees right the
Supreme Court recognized a right to
same-sex marriage. Originalist justices
at the time believed that ruling was
wrongly decided. One of the arguments
for why Oberafel versus Hajes is
unlikely to ever be overturned is the
idea that people have made decisions
about who to marry and therefore where
to live and children and everything else
on the right on the basis of that
ruling.
>> Those are absolutely reliance interests
but I wouldn't describe and when you
said social reliance interests that kind
of sounds like
>> in things in the air those are very
concrete reliance interests. So those
would be classic reliance interests in
the in the terms of the law in terms of
legal doctrine. Those would be like
those are financial those are you know
medical those are you know uh well you
know you can imagine going on
>> but so then but then is there a
distinction between those kind of
reliance interests and let's say the
interests of someone who made a certain
set of life choices on the assumption
that the right to abortion would be
available to them right like why why
does why does Roie Wade fail the tests
of star decisis in this or other areas.
>> So for purposes of um row and Casey if
you're looking at the specific reliance
interests what the court has said was
well yes but the reliance interest would
run for 9 months. So that the the more
general and and this would be a disputed
area of law. This kind of is there was
some dispute back and forth about this
in Casey between the plurality and the
dissenting opinions in that case. but
that more nebulous. That's why I was
kind of pushing back a little bit when
you said societal interests and then you
listed the um
>> the kinds of reliance interests that
people would have in marriage. I would
define those differently than just
saying they're social reliance interests
because I think ones that are not
concrete or that just have to do sort of
like with vagger conceptions, those are
the kinds of things that are really hard
for judges to measure or to know about.
So, I'm not saying that they don't
matter. those do but for legal doctrine
to take account of them would be quite
challenging. So as a matter of legal
doctrine those are not the kinds of
reliance interests that are classically
considered part of the star decisis
calculus. One of the points that you've
made uh in the past is that when
originalism was sort of first taking
hold as a popular theory, one of the
reasons for its popularity was that it
was seen as offering a kind of restraint
on justices, right? that um you know we
had just gone through the Burger Court
but really before that the Warren Court
which was very active in um let's say
discovering new rights under the banner
of substantive due process and
originalism seemed to say okay this is a
way to limit the Supreme Court's power
but you've also noted that just as a
theoretical matter originalism isn't a
theory of restraint per se it doesn't
say that justices should avoid void
being activists or should just defer to
legislatores or anything like that,
right? Um, is an originalist as likely
just at a theoretical level to be ready
to overturn a president as any other
kind of justice, do you think?
>> So there's nothing in the theory of
originalism,
I think, that makes justices more or
less likely to overrule president. I
mean,
>> William O. Douglas, who was a justice
who was far from an originalist. You
know, he has
justices who he he subscribed to more
what I would describe a living
constitution view. For that to be your
view where you're constantly updating
constitutional doctrine to bring it into
step with the mood of the time would be
one way to describe it. You have to be
willing to overrule a lot of precedents
to do that. The Warren Court in fact
did. So an originalist, some would say,
well, I mean, originalists would be more
willing to overrule precedent so that
they can return. So maybe their reason
like it might
>> before right before you have something
like the Warren Court, the originalist
maybe is more modest. But if you have a
wave of sort of inventive rulings,
right, then the originalist has their
own incentives to be activist in turn,
>> maybe. But if you also have others who
take a more kind of progressive or
living constitutionalist approach on the
court, they still have same the same
incentives to continue to overrule
precedent to take it in that direction.
So I guess I don't mean to say that I
think either side is hellbent on
remaking constitutional law. That isn't
what I mean. I just don't think the
problem of precedent is unique to any
particular jurist credential theory. It
is one that every judge must and every
theory has to grapple with it and every
judge faces the challenge.
>> What restrains the Supreme Court or a
Supreme Court justice given the pretty
open-ended authority that the
Constitution or at least Marberry versus
Madison's interpretation of the
Constitution gives gives to the Supreme
Court.
>> I think there are a lot of checks on the
Supreme Court. So, I guess I would
resist characterizing the Supreme Court
as an institution with open-ended
authority. I mean for one thing our
jurisdiction is pretty narrow. Um we
have jurisdiction that's hemmed in both
by the constitution itself and then also
by Congress's power to dictate the
limits of our jurisdiction. So we can't
decide just anything and we can't
announce you know when I when I was
first confirmed a friend said so what's
the first case you're going to decide
and you know that's not how it works.
It's not like a president who goes in
and has an agenda and then on day one
says this is what we're going to start
doing. We wait, the cases come to us.
We're a reactive institution. Um,
Congress gets to dictate the limits of
our jurisdiction. The Constitution does,
too. And all of those things hem the
court in.
>> But the court obviously goes through
periods where it seems to occupy a more
expansive role in American life, right?
The Warren Court being being an example.
Um, and I guess I wonder maybe about a
related temptation or issue which is
just the extent to which any Supreme
Court justice and any Supreme Court
theory can resist sort of the pull of
partisanship and ideological commitment.
Right. And I've read a lot of Supreme
Court interviews, not only with you,
where justices,
you know, go on at great length about
how we should not see the Supreme Court
as a partisan institution and how most
of the cases that come before the court
are not decided along any kind of
ideological lines. People are
unpredictable. You have nine to nothing
rulings. You have mixed up six to three
rulings and so on. And that's all true.
Nonetheless, when it comes to the
biggest the biggest cases, the cases
that you know, as you say, are the
hardest questions, right? The the ones
that get get to the Supreme Court, the
ones that get the headlines. It really
is the case that
the safest way to bet is to say
Republican appointees are going to line
up on one side and Democratic appointees
are going to line up on the other,
especially now that the Republican party
has become a little better at vetting
its judicial nominations, right? So what
what is what is your theory for one why
that happens and two does originalism
restrain Republicanapp appointed
justices from just issuing Republican
rulings in any substantial way? Well, I
guess I do want to push back against
your premise a little bit because my
very first term on the court, there was
a challenge to the Affordable Care Act
that people were convinced, you know,
was going to be a 63 decision and it
wasn't. I think it was
81, maybe 72.
>> Was this King versus
>> No, King versus Burwell predated my
time. This was California versus Texas.
Um, you know, there were cases, there
have been in the last couple terms,
cases about guns and cases about voting
that Xanti at the beginning of the term,
people thought were the really big cases
and everybody thought like, oh, that's
going to be a 63 case that's going to
break down. And then once the vote
doesn't come out that way, once it's 72,
81 or even unanimous, then nobody talks
about those cases. So I don't think it's
true that even in all of the deeply
contested closely watched cases but it
is true that in some subset of those so
you know that that's undeniable that
there is a subset of cases
last term and I might have this number
exactly wrong cuz now I'm just thinking
of it off the top of my head. think
there might have been six cases that
broke down 63 by party of appointing
president
and all of those six were not ones that
listeners would probably care deeply
about. Some of them were more arcane
issues. So what explains that that
difference? So you're suggesting that
well can do we all think that it's just
partisanship?
>> I I I guess I'm not suggesting that it's
just partisanship. I get I'm just
suggesting that there are times when I
read a ruling like the um the first
Obamacare ruling which was on the
question of whether the constitution
allowed the imposition of an individual
mandate in healthcare,
>> right? And and that one broke down in a
very weird way, but effectively uh it
was 441 with Chief Justice Roberts as
the swing vote. And you know, I'm
someone who grew up as a conservative,
has a deep sympathy for originalism, but
I read I read those arguments back and
forth, and it just seemed to me to be a
kind of constitutional coin flip. And
maybe that's unfair, right? But where it
stood to reason that Antinine Scalia in
the end was going to decide that the
Constitution didn't allow this mandate
because he didn't like Obamacare. Right.
>> I think it's Well, I Let's see. I'm
certainly not going to say I think
that's why Justice Scalia I wouldn't
expect you to.
>> No, but I I think Ross what it what
explains it. Now I I just want to
bracket that judges are human and judges
are fallible and I certainly wouldn't
sit here and say that judges never make
mistakes or let their partisan views or
personal views bleed into their marriage
judgment. I wouldn't say that. So
bracket that point for the moment. But I
think in cases like the Affordable Care
Act case, the commerce clause challenge
that you're talking about or even in
DOBS, I think those breakdowns are
explained fundamentally by baseline
differences and and approaches to the
constitution.
So for example in DOBS like putting
let's put aside the star decisis point
for the moment on the merits point the
difference of opinion between the
majority and the disscent was on the
role of the court and identifying
unenumerated rights that's a fundamental
that's not that's a disagreement that is
a constitutional jurist credential one
that transcends just the specific debate
about abortion. It's a debate on which
conservatives and liberals have long
disagreed about the role of the court in
interpreting the constitution. Same with
the commerce clause. It's just true and
this goes back to debates about the
first bank of the United States that
there have been competing camps of
constitutional lawyers since the time of
the founding who have approached the
commerce clause with a fundamentally
narrow interpretation or a fundamentally
broader one. That's the fight between
Alexander Hamilton and Thomas Jefferson.
And we've just seen that play out again
more recently. So I kind of point out in
the book there's nothing new under the
sun in that respect.
>> Okay. Well, let's let's carry this
question into the current political
landscape, right? Where
>> where where where we're in an
environment where um many of the central
questions the court is taking up in the
second Trump administration have to do
with executive power. um claims of
executive power made by the Trump
administration
um that uh are if not novel at least we
could call them ambitious and
aggressive. I think it's fair to say you
don't have to call I will call them
ambitious and aggressive right. Uh, so
would you say there are sort of
long-standing camps debating the scope
of executive power and is there a sort
of basic originalist view of executive
power that sort of exists above and
around the particular controversies
you're likely to deal with this term?
So I would say that um the unitary
executive theory which is the theory
that article 2 vests the executive power
in the president is one that has long
been associated with originalism. It's
one that justice Scalia advocated the
idea that the president has to control
the executive branch. He had a famous
descent in Morrison versus Olsen which
was a case that upheld the
constitutionality of the independent
council statute and essentially Justice
Glay's objection to the majority opinion
holding that the independent council
statute was constitutional was that you
could not have a prosecutor within the
executive branch exercising
prosecutorial power, executive power
that was outside of the line of the
president's control because he
essentially became sort of this um
bureaucrat with power, prosecutor,
prosecutor with power unto himself.
Um so yes, unitary executive theory is
one that has it's a structural theory
>> and it implies it implies strong
presidential power over federal
agencies. For instance,
>> it would imply strong presidential power
over executive agencies. There has been
a lot of debate and some new originalist
scholarship debating right now you know
whether indeed it has sound originalist
credentials. Um but yes it is one that
has traditionally been associated with
originalists. And this is you know you
can see this in debates during uh the
great depression and FDR
um and the New Deal and the explosion of
the administrative state back then. You
had a debate about how much Congress
could create administrative agencies
that fell outside of the president's
control. And you know, there were some
who said no, the the executive branch
has to be fully within the executive's
control and others who favored the New
Deal expansion of the administrative
state who said no, Congress can take
agencies and make them independent of
the president's control. That's
essentially the debate that we're seeing
play out in some of the cases on the
court's docket now.
>> Right. And yeah, I think it's fair to
say that the Supreme Court has a
majority right now that is broadly in
tune with some of the arguments you've
just sketched. I I feel like I see your
your mouth twitching slightly. I'm just
making statements. You can you can agree
or disagree. Um but there have been a
number of cases or at least a few
related to executive power already in
this administration where you have
written if not a dissenting opinion at
least a separate
>> opinion.
>> Um
>> right. So for instance in the in the
presidential immunity
>> right
>> decision
>> right there the majority offered an
expansive or what was seen as an
expansive view. Again, this is me
editorializing, not you. Right. And you
joined the majority, but also wrote
separately. Right.
>> I joined I mostly joined the majority. I
didn't join all of it. I mostly joined
the majority and I wrote separately
because I understood it a bit more
narrowly.
>> Could you just talk a little bit about
how you might see executive power
differently from some of your
colleagues?
>> Well, so remember I'm observing
confirmation hearing rules here. you
know, the the immunity decision was a
question of it it wasn't actually even
of
executive
power straight up in the way that we're
talking about this unitary executive
problem.
That was a different kind of
>> Yeah,
>> that was a different kind of question.
And I think it's probably fair to say
that all of the more recent cases,
they're all on the interim
slashemergency
slash, you know, whatever we want to
call it these days docket. So they're
still in progress. So they're cases in
which one might say the ending is TBD,
so I can't talk about them.
>> Okay. Okay. Then then let's let's return
maybe to a slightly higher level of uh
sort of more theoretical or more general
considerations, right?
We're living through an era where it
seems to a lot of observers like
Congress is increasingly
unwilling to or at least unexcited by
the exercise of its own powers. And that
this is especially true when it's under
control, the control of the same party
as as the White House. like there's a
broad sense that Congress is doing less
and in sort of a dynamic relationship to
that the presidency is doing more. As a
member of the third branch, the other
branch,
do you think that considerations like
that have any role to play in the
court's obligation? Like in the sense
that something like the exe unitary
executive theory, right, might have a
similar theoretical basis in 1975 as it
does in 2025. But in 1975 the executive
is relatively weak hemmed in by the
postwatergate congress and um you know
more limited and today I think it's fair
to say the executive is much more
powerful than it was at that period
right so does is that something that
enters into judicial considerations when
you're thinking about the cases that you
take the scope of the rulings that you
decide to make does that does does the
existing balance of power between the
branches matter at all to juristp
prudence.
>> So there's a lot in that question.
>> Yes.
>> I I I think maybe I'll I'll hit two
points in response. I think at a broad
level it's important to say and I think
this is actually a disconnect between
what observers of the court expect to
see and what the court can actually do.
I think the press and and and the public
lives in the particular moment. You're
either living in the Watergate years or
you're living right now. And so you're
seeing everything through that lens. The
court has to take a longer view. And so
the content of doctrine cannot turn on
just the precise political moment
because the doctrine we're drawing on
the cases that have come before and I'm
not saying this just this isn't anything
to do with just being an originalist.
You know, the court decides cases not
just like in a one, you know, ticket
this train only. what we decide today is
going to apply tomorrow. You know, one
point that I've made, I I talk in the
book a couple times about decisions that
John Marshall made, you know, including
in the trial of Aaron Burr. Those cases
got cited within the last couple of
years on more than one occasion. So,
what we decide now would be cited, you
know, seven, eight or nine presidents
from now. So we have to be very careful
that the content of the doctrine isn't
fashioned just for the moment because
one reason that the constitution has
been able to survive is that it isn't
contingent only on a particular period.
So that's kind of at a broad level. But
I do think there is a lot of discretion.
You know you asked about does it affect
the scope of decisions?
>> Yes, I think it can. I think those kinds
of considerations
the court does have a little bit more
room in that regard in deciding the
breadth of a decision. You also
>> and whether to leave whether to leave
certain questions temporarily
unanswered.
>> That is not always possible, right?
>> But yes, where it is possible that is
the kind of a thing where the court can
decide, you know, how where where it can
there is sometimes a range of discretion
and deciding how broadly or narrowly a
rule to write a rule or rule should be.
>> And this is this is one of the conceits
about Chief Justice Roberts in
particular that again you may or may not
agree with, right? But a lot of people
see him in his role as chief justice as
someone who is supposed to be the
steward of the court's position that in
particularly fraught moments you go for
the consensus point that delivers the
non-polarizing ruling over time. Roberts
doesn't have he doesn't have a lot of
really committed admirers, right?
Obviously, he doesn't have a lot of
left-wing fans, but a lot of
conservatives prefer a kind of firm
doctrinal consistency to sort of his
kind of more political mentality.
I've developed a lot of sympathy for
that kind of approach. And again, you
may not think that he is actually taking
that approach. Um, but I'm I'm curious
to what extent you think that enters
into especially like a chief justice's
calculations. Like is the time ripe for
a decision for instance?
>> Well, let's see. So, I certainly won't
be the, you know, the Chief Justice
Roberts, you know, interpreter horse
whisperer.
>> We hope we hope to get him on the show
eventually
>> where he will just sit and say he will
he will say nothing for 45 minutes. One
one reaction I have to what you said is,
you know, at the beginning you asked me
about whether um I sought to kind of be
an icon or have a persona, whether I
thought it was a good thing. And you
pointed out that the chief justice has a
few admires on either side. And I think
that is a tribute to him because I think
an important part of this job and
something I talk about in the book is
you have to be willing to be disliked.
And so I think it's pretty clear that no
decision that Chief Justice Roberts has
made has been in an effort to build
himself a following. You know, his
decisions are, you know, he's making
decisions quite plainly, you know, based
on what whatever the calculus may be.
And I I won't offer a view on that, but
he's plainly making decisions that he
thinks are the right decisions for the
country, the court, the constitution,
and not with an eye towards, you know,
building up a fan base. And I think
that's commendable.
>> All right, let's try to be a little more
concrete again as we move towards
towards the end even at the risk of of
non-answers. Um the Trump administration
has sort of discovered ways to use
executive power uh to gain advantages
even if in the end it loses the legal
foray that it makes. Right? So we were
talking earlier about reliance interests
uh and the extent to which you can have
facts on the ground that might make the
Supreme Court hesitant to overrule or
overturn something. The administration
has taken extraordinary steps around
tariff policy. It's created substantial
facts on the ground long before the
Supreme Court gets around to hearing the
case. You're not going to answer a
question about tariffs, but can you
answer a more general question about how
how a court should think about sort of
executive maneuvering and attempts to
sort of box the Supreme Court in or um
use the law in ways that are in effect
sort of disingenuous?
>> Uh I don't think I can answer that one.
It's too difficult to
>> that's fine.
>> Extricate from the current
>> No, that's fine. from current cases.
>> Okay. So,
a very wise friend to me observed when I
was preparing for this interview that it
seems that the Trump White House has
been extremely differential to the
Supreme Court and extremely critical of
the lower courts in terms of sort of
expansive hostile rhetoric to lower
court rulings. To what extent does the
Supreme Court uh have an obligation to
see itself as a defender and protector
of the entire judicial branch in
conflicts with the executive?
>> I don't know that I really can answer
that one either because that wads in
very much to the
into current debates which I probably
>> Okay, let's make it general. Let's make
it general. So when I was younger,
almost all of the most stinging
critiques of the Supreme Court came from
the right.
>> And now there are still plenty of
stinging critiques of the court from the
right. And but there's also a sort of
substantial movement from the political
left uh that you know raised
possibilities of court packing, adding
justices to the Supreme Court, stripping
the court of jurisdiction, other things
in the Biden era. Is there an extent to
which the kind of Robert's approach
becomes more important when the court is
under threat or critique from both right
and left? Or is it even more important
in that kind of moment to maintain
um a sort of intellectual independence
where you are sort of insulating
yourself entirely from any kind of sense
of political pressure?
>> My own view.
>> Your own view. My own view and what I
say pretty clearly in the book is
intellectual independence. I mean I
think you have to make a judgment. You
really cannot once you once you allow
yourself and you open the door to
letting outside pressures of any kind
influence or dictate especially dictate
um your decisions then therein it's
over. there in lies madness because you
you your oath my oath requires fidelity
to the constitution and to decide these
cases by my best lights and you know
honestly I'm a judge I'm a lawyer I'm
not a politician it's pretty difficult
for me to say what public opinion is I'm
not a pollster I don't know what the
consequences would be so I don't even
think that judges are particularly well
suited to try to guess at at some of
those things. So you're
>> but but some of but some of the
decisions that you make for reasons we
discussed earlier, right? Obviously have
to try to take into account some issues
in that terrain. Just the exchange we
had before about abortion where we were
discussing, you know, to what extent are
abortion rights deeply rooted in the
culture and politics of the United
States, right? like you are making some
kind of cultural assessment about the
state of American life when you do
something like that, right?
>> Well, I resisted when you described it
as a cultural assessment and I said,
well, it's a legal assessment and in the
cases where we've actually made it,
we've been making
>> a legal inquiry looking at what the
state of the law was on the books and
the kind of assessment that gauging
public opinion or public reaction would
not be a legal assessment. nor would it
be one that were was kind of focused in
the way that our substantive due process
doctrine focuses the inquiry in cases
like dos. It would be kind of well when
I when I read your newspaper Ross when I
read the New York Times what do I think
people think about this and I just
resist that entirely as the kind of
thing I ought to be taking into account
making decisions. And is that does that
apply also to the kind of long view that
you were describing earlier when you
said look, you know, we're not making
law just for the Trump era. We're making
law for the next 50 years. It doesn't it
doesn't bring in any kind of, you know,
concrete vision of what the future might
actually look like.
>> Let's see. So, I think these are
complicated questions because we might
be talking about different things. When
you when you ask me, do we account for
public opinion? you do look forward and
you do take into account consequences of
decisions. You raised the Trump immunity
decision from last year. Um in that
case, part of what the court's opinion
said was we'll look at the consequences
of this kind of retribution that would
come if the president didn't have some
sort of immunity. He would be inhibited
>> um and his because like looking forward,
I mean the the the opinion took account
of what might happen in the future to
the office. So that
>> and it's but yes and then the effects of
that on the larger constitutional
balance of power the state of the
American republic right
>> yes it did but
>> I just don't I don't think you can quite
get away from those kind of like let's
call them common good considerations. So
those kinds of considerations are and
always have been part of the the fair
game and standard fair of constitutional
decision-making. I took you to be asking
about public reaction to the court in
particular like should the court be
taking account of its own skin? Um
should the court be taking account of
the the backlash that it will suffer?
Should
>> but why are those two things separable?
Why is it okay to say it's all right to
think about how this decision plays out
for the health of the republic as a
whole, but it's not okay to worry about
mass backlash against the judiciary
specifically.
>> So if you think about it,
I think maybe we're talking about
different things. I do think thinking
about the larger structural point is
important. I think thinking about how
our institutions will be affected in the
long term is important because we are
making decisions as I said before not
just looking at what happened in the
past but looking forward into what will
happen in the future. I guess what I
would resist is say saying that a
decision should be dictated by
short-term consequences or short-term
pain in the institution. Brown versus
the board visited a lot of backlash on
the court, but it that was the right
thing to do. Obviously, it needed needed
to do it despite the short-term cost.
So, I I I guess it was maybe the
short-term cost that I was resisting,
>> right? And so, this will be the last
question.
One issue related to those kind of
short-term costs and long-term costs is
just the question of the Supreme Court's
own position in the balance of powers
between the branches and
>> its ability to get the other branches to
heed its rulings. Right? The Supreme
Court does not command the power of the
purse, doesn't command the military, it
doesn't have police powers, right? what
it has in a sense is prestige, public
support, a historic constitutional role
and so on. And we're in a moment, and we
don't have to make this specific to the
Trump White House, we're in a moment
where it's very easy to imagine from
either the left or the right, some
present or future president deciding to
test the court, Andrew Jackson style,
saying, "Interesting ruling, Justice
Barrett. Good luck enforcing it."
How do you think about that potential
challenge as a member of the court?
>> Well, I think that you are absolutely
right that just as the court must take
account of the consequences on the
institutional dynamics say between a
current president and a future
president, the balance of power between
the executive branch and the legislative
branch. Of course, those same kinds of
institutional concerns for the long run
are ones that play a part in the court's
separation of powers decisions and
always have because they also are
reflected in concerns of the
constitutional structure.
>> Okay, let me try that again. If a
president defied the Supreme Court, what
would you do?
>> Well,
the as you say, the court lacks the
power of the purse. We lack the power of
the sword and so we interpret the
constitution. We draw in precedence. We
have these questions of of structure and
you know we make the most with the tools
that we have.
>> Justice Barrett, thank you so much for
joining us.
>> Pleasure to be here. Thank you for
having me, Ross.
>> You're very welcome.
[Music]